>> Hello and welcome to
the Haskell Weekly podcast.
I'm your host, taylor Fausak.
I'm the Director of Software
Engineering at ACI Learning.
With me today is Cameron Gera,
one of the engineers on my team.
Thanks for joining me today, Cam.
>> Thanks for having me, Taylor.
I'm excited to get back
to some podcasting.
Uh, today we've got a fun topic.
I think it's, uh, A little bit
on the void side of Haskell.
Um, actually the, the article was
called the voids of Haskell by Alexander
Granin, uh, who is the author of
functional design and architecture.
Um, and generally to kind of start
out this article is very much
like Haskell is great and it's
getting better, but there's still
something missing.
And there's this void in Haskell and
that's, you know, the big idea of
what we're going to talk about today.
>> Yeah.
So, uh, he says the voids and
implying there's more than one,
but what are the voids
that he's talking about?
>> Um, the voids that he's
talking about mostly are the voids
in the book world related to Haskell
and the various design patterns,
the various thought processes, the
various design choices you can make.
And, uh, I think.
He actually lays out a really good list of
books that would be really nice to have.
And so I think we're going to cover a
couple of those today, uh, and, you know,
give somebody more of a practical resource
instead of, you know, a blog post, which
blog posts can help you with stuff, but
it doesn't give you the big picture of the
language and how it relates to the larger,
you know, intricacy of the language,
because there's things in Haskell that.
A lot of languages don't necessarily
have, and there's a strong type
system that allows you to do and
program in a way that doesn't
allow mistakes to happen and stuff.
So, um, I think pretty excited about
the books we're going to talk about
today as far as possible books.
So for any of our listeners find
any of these really interesting.
Or you guys read the article yourself,
you know, to try to tackle it, see
what you see if you can make that book.
Because for me personally, I'm
not sure what would, what would it
take to make a book?
Um, what would it make?
What would it
take for you, Taylor?
You think?
Yeah.
>> uh, for me to
write a book, I would need.
No job, I guess it would
take a lot of time.
Um, but beyond that, I don't know.
I've never tried to write a book either.
I've written blog posts.
And as you mentioned, blog posts, can't go
into the same amount of detail as a book.
And sometimes that's fine.
You know, you can have a really.
Precise point you're trying
to make or an example.
Um, but sometimes it's more useful to
have the full worked end to end example,
that good gets into all the little caveats
and the things you actually have to
worry about when you're doing something
that's not just a demo or something
you're showing off for a blog post.
And, um, one of the things I like about
what Alexander did here with his posts,
It is, he gave a lot of options, right?
There's like 20 something
blog or sorry, book topics.
So he's casting a wide net
and there's lots of different
people in the Haskell community.
And I think there is a lot of potential
for good stuff to come out of this.
>> Yeah.
And I, and I, as you kind of pointed to
blog posts being pretty limited in scope.
When you have a textbook, you can
generally reference the previous chapters
where you said, remember in chapter five,
when we talked about this, well, here's.
Why that was important, um,
because it impacts chapter seven.
So the relationships between concepts
are much easier to represent in a
textbook rather, or a more verbose book
than a blog post, because it doesn't
necessarily have to be a textbook, but
you know, a handbook, you know, we have
learned you a Haskell, which is just
kind of a step-by-step guide basic.
Principals of high school.
Um, and they do a lot of like
referencing to previous chapters of
the book and stuff like that.
So, um, that's another
great benefit of books.
>> That's a really good point.
And you can pull that off with
blog posts, you know, like,
oh, this is part of a series.
Go read the previous posts
if you want to find out more.
But more generally I think blog
posts are intended to be like
a drive by resource either.
It's something that is approachable
enough where you can have the whole
thing self-contained, or it's a deep
dive on some really niche topic.
So.
Only people that are already interested in
that are going to seek it out and they'll
already have all the requisite knowledge.
>> right.
Yeah.
And you know, back to the point of why he.
Was kind of saying there's a void here
or there's voids here in Haskell is a lot
of the other mainstream languages have
a lot of textbooks and a lot of books
that reference various concepts, design
patterns, and, you know, architecture
choices that people can use and pick up.
And, you know, there's some for the
functional languages, but a lot of them
are for the object oriented languages.
So when Haskell can create these
books, it creates an open door
for the functional paradigm to.
Kind of move in.
Um, you know, I know overall the
funk programming world is moving
more functional, you know, there's
functional, JavaScript, whatever that is.
And, you know, there's all
kinds of different stuff.
That's moving, you know, different
object oriented programming languages
that are implementing functional design
choices, uh, because it's intuitive.
It's, you know, Easy for people who
have been learning math and it's
kindergarten, you know, where you
learn, you pick up some algebra.
Oh, okay.
Here's how these things relate.
Here's how, you know, I pass my function.
I'm going to pass to another function.
Well, it's going to
evaluate and give you a
result.
That's great.
Um, and you, and you'll know
more or less what's happening.
>> Yeah.
And, uh, you know, another, uh, another
angle of this, I think that would be
interesting to explore is how many papers
have been written in or about Haskell?
Cause you know, it has kind of academic
roots and a lot of the things that
people do with GHC to add new stuff
to it are part of their PhD thesis.
So they ended up writing a paper for it.
I would, I would bet that
Haskell has more papers.
Than most other languages,
maybe any other language.
Um, but clearly those are not as
valuable of a resource for what
Alexander points out in here
of like a day to day, you know,
practitioner more so than a researcher.
And that's what he seems to have
focused on with these topics.
>> Right.
And I think to the, some of the people
who may have interest in Haskell kind
of shy away from using it in production,
because it's got such a research
heavy background and, you know, People
may feel like, oh, this is only good
for compiling results and, you know,
enhancing minor speed changes or whatever.
Cause as you get know, as hassle gets
more and more contributed to there's
more of, uh, you know, I guess,
or in the academic sense, there's
less like major changes happening.
On the academic side, it's just
like one little thing or one.
And so
I'm curious if commercial
Haskell's really kind of shut
conventional Haskell uses shied
away from because of that.
>> Would be, um, and you
know, major changes I think are
still happening, like linear
Haskell, or even dependent
types making its way in.
Um, and I just want to point out
that like, for us at it pro slash
ACI, um, we are, we shy away from the
research heavy stuff, but we still
use Haskell and it's been a boon
for our engineering organization.
So even if you're just doing
normal, you know, HTTP, API stuff,
Haskell works great for that.
>> Yeah, it really does.
And I think, you know, he points
to that in his kind of introduction
to this post of, you know,
Haskell is a really good tool.
Yes.
It may have higher overhead
to learn in the beginning,
but the velocity you gain at the
end of the day is much greater
than the time lost in learning it.
>> So I think we've set
the table pretty well here.
Uh, do you want to dig
into some of these book
topics?
>> Yeah.
I mean, we've got a whole entire, a feast
hero of topics to choose from as well.
You know, I think it's, I mean, we have
more options and Thanksgiving day, you
>> Yeah.
So where should we start?
What's our appetizer.
>> um, well, I I'd
like to touch on one that.
I think it's a very interesting one and
something that's a little more hidden.
We've actually talked about it on
the Haskell weekly podcast before.
Um, but it's a book called
gain development in Haskell.
Wouldn't that be a nice thing to have?
You know, you can take it,
you can see, oh, Hey, I can
make a, you know, a 2d game.
This is how this works.
Okay.
Well, you know, cause.
I mean, those are kind of fun.
They're, they're an easy way to get in.
Right.
So like, you know, it's a perfect way
for a teenage person to be like, oh
yeah, I want to make a game for myself
that I
can play.
Well, okay.
Hey, here's
this game development Haskell.
Everybody loves games.
So why not?
>> Yeah, I agree.
I think this would be a
great kind of starter topic.
And one of the reasons
I think that is that.
For a library like gloss or, um, even SDL,
but more so gloss, uh, you can start with
nothing and pretty quickly have something
interactive up on your screen, like
visually interactive, where you can click
on stuff with your mouse and see it react.
And that to me, I think is a lot
more, um, motivating then like
writing a command line program that.
I don't know, does something, but
a game with it's instant feedback
is really rewarding to see the
progress you made were like, oh, I
want to change how that thing looks.
I'll make the change over
here and then bring it up and,
oh, look, it's different now.
I made that change happen.
That feels good.
>> Yeah, that's what I liked to do.
And with Alan, cause it's that front
end language that allows you to see
the result of your change quickly.
Um, it interacts with the code you
wrote rather than be like, it's doing
something back there, um, in the
back end, but I'm not really sure.
>> Yeah.
Um, so unfortunately neither
of us are game developers.
Uh, last time on the podcast when
this was a topic, Dustin and Cody
were talking about it, and Dustin has
some experience with game development.
So I'd be curious, uh, you know, he
may be a good candidate for writing
a book about game development.
Haskell we'll have to bug him about that.
>> yeah,
I'll make it part of his,
uh, annual review process.
Hey man, I got this great goal for you,
man.
I think you should write
a book called game day.
Well in Haskell, you'll make hundreds,
>> You'll make hundreds of dollars.
>> I can't guarantee thousands
or millions, but you know, hundreds,
>> Yeah.
>> you know,
>> but yeah, I
don't have much else to
say about game development.
I think it would be great.
And I would love to see it.
And I've tried to write some
tiny games in high school.
So, I mean, maybe I should write
the book, but I think I wrote
blog posts about them at the time.
So I'm doing my part.
>> Yeah.
It's not enough to tell her we need more.
Yeah.
I mean, we don't want you to quit, so
you, you're not allowed to write a book.
You already said you have to quit
your job and that's not okay.
We'd be.
>> I protected myself there.
So, so the ne the next potential book
topic we could talk about, uh, it's
a little closer to home for us is
test-driven development in Haskell.
And I think we probably
talked about testing before.
I don't think we've had an entire
episode devoted to it, but it comes up
a lot as a topic here on the podcast.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, test driven development is a big.
Big thing around the software industry.
Right.
You know, anytime you go for a coding
interview or you read a job posting
it's oh, are you familiar with TDD?
Um, and generally they're
meaning test driven development.
There's other TBDs that
we'll get to later actually.
Um, but they're talking about this concept
of, you know, red, green refactoring and,
and you know, the big names in Haskell
or in the programming world, you know,
Martin Fowler, all those guys have.
Written and talked about why test
driven fellow it's important.
And, you know, with Haskell being,
you know, quote unquote academic,
I think people tend to not really
worry about test driven development.
They're more worried about the results.
And so we haven't seen that
from the academic side.
Maybe I could be wrong, but.
You know, when you're writing a day-to-day
application and something that you're
supposed to maintain longterm, um, you
know, having a book for test different
development Haskell would be really
helpful to, you know, understand
first of all, like the semantics of
testing and at school, uh, really kind
of understanding and clarifying the
types of tests within Haswell, right.
Property unit.
Uh, integration, all
those kinds of things.
You know, you want to kind of expand
upon those and how they relate.
Um, and also it'd be nice to kind
of know how, you know, test driven
development works for various like
frameworks or,
you know, um, things
we'll just say libraries.
>> Yeah.
I think there's a huge breadth of
topics that could be addressed in a
book like this.
Like you mentioned, just the
different types of testing.
Would be interesting to cover.
And then from there you can springboard
into, these are the libraries that can
provide, you know, frameworks to write
tests of this type in, or that type.
And here's why you may prefer
this library over that library.
Um, I think most people reach
for like H spec, but as a
beginner, you may not know that.
And as an intermediate
person, you may not know.
What alternatives are there and why
may you want to use one of them?
Um, and similarly touching on like
integration testing in particular,
um, you know, if you follow the
reader, Tio or Rio, um, kind of
framework, how do you test that?
And that could also, you know, touch on
maybe some of the benefits of effects
systems and how that impacts testing.
Um, but also focus on, okay,
if you're doing IO, how do you
actually test that effectively?
Um, and that's just scratching the surface
of the topics that could be covered here.
And there's so much, but
yeah, I would love to see,
>> yeah, this could easily
turn it into a 500 page book.
>> yeah.
>> maybe we should start with a
couple hundred page books to get people.
Yeah.
A little bit more
prepared and geared up for
>> Like some magazines.
>> yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
I was going to say like, uh, catalogs,
you know, like, you know, how like
series back in the day would just
mail you a catalog with all the
things you could buy, you know,
maybe we do that for testing Haskell.
>> I like it.
>> Yeah.
Well, I was mentioning earlier at
the other TDD, um, and this is type
driven development with Haskell, which.
Is one of the strengths of Haskell
is its type system and, uh, really
kind of understanding and, and yeah,
I guess understanding and grokking
are the same thing, but, uh, really
getting a deeper knowledge base of how
the type system works, how, you know,
the type there's tight families
there's type, uh, Applications
there's type all kinds of type.
>> Pretty much type.
It can be a prefix on anything.
>> Right, right.
And so why don't we, why don't
we take some time and create
a verbose book on the type type system
and type driven development in a Haskell.
>> Yeah.
and not only covering the.
Different things you can
do with the type system.
Like what is the type family,
what does it allow you to do?
And then also, why might
you want to do that?
So like I touched on earlier with like
affect systems and how they affect, pardon
the pun, how they influenced testing, um,
you know, for type different development.
Like I know about type families,
but why might I want to use them?
What problems do they solve?
What things you know,
which states are then.
On representable because I've chosen to
use type families or J DTS or, you know,
uh, functional dependencies or any number
of the type based, um, language extensions
in GHC and it could be shenanigans yeah.
Type based shenanigans.
Um, he doesn't list.
So in these kind of, uh,
hypothetical books that we've
been talking about, he lists.
Some other books from other programming
languages that touch on these topics.
And one that I think could be brought
up here is not a printed book, but the
servant, um, both their like documentation
for the servant library and the kind of
rationale for why they built it and how
they built it and how you might build your
own kind of minimal servant style library.
Um, because that is some very advanced.
Type level stuff, and they do a very
good job of motivating why you need
each step along the way, like, oh,
wouldn't it be nice if you could write
something like this, it turns out
you can't, unless you turn on this
extension, what does that extension do?
It does this and here's
how it changes the code.
>> all right.
So we're just pawning this book off
the serpents in the law library,
maintainers of that library.
Okay, cool.
I'm down.
Yeah.
And I like that he makes a good point too,
here in his little, kind of a synopsis
of what this book would be about where,
you know, there's a lot of languages that
have kind of taken bits and pieces of.
Haskell's type system and implement
engine at their own language.
And so it could be nice to kind of show,
Hey, this has been in Haskell all along.
Here's all the things that
Haskell's allows you to do that.
Yes, you may be able to do now in
other languages, but Haskell's been
doing it longer and they're trying to
make it better every step of the way.
Um, you know, and as we start to come
out with newer iterations of the Haskell
language, um, right, we've got GA she.
2020, which is a group of language
extensions that probably help a
lot with the type level of stuff.
Um, and getting more examples of
how that affects, you know, the
day-to-day code, writing of Haskell
and what it allows you to do.
Cause I think we're missing
that and you know, sure.
You can read blog post, or you could
read the specs for every language
extension and how this works, but
unless you can see like, uh, end to
end example, And something that's
walking you through and motivating
you, like, like the servant library
does and the documentation around it.
You know, people aren't going to
really dive in and take that direction
unless you have a desire to know that,
which is if you do that's awesome.
Like explore it, take the time, learn it.
It's awesome.
It's great.
We'd ha have you servant here?
And we.
You know, yes, it was a little bit of a
headache at first, but now that we have
that type safety, we are grateful and
we've really become accustomed to it.
And we've kind of forced our hand at
learning the type system
a little bit deeper.
Um, so if we had books
like this would be helpful.
>> it would.
And, uh, you know, you mentioned like,
These, some of these things are already
available as blog posts and for the
people that are interested in pushing
the boundaries of the type system, that
material is already out there, they
can go read the papers they came from.
They can read the GFC documentation,
but that motivating example to bring you
from why should I care about this at all?
All the way to.
Man, this is awesome.
I'm so glad that Haskell does it.
We don't have a resource or even a path
of resources that can do that for somebody
that isn't already steeped in this stuff.
Um, so at this point we've talked
about test driven development
type driven development.
I think there's a third one in
this list of domain driven design.
So we got TDD, TDD and DDD.
So what's DDD.
>> um, So domain-driven design is
really the concept that your code and
what you write, describe like the complex
domains that you're applying it to.
Um, so, you know, when you're
writing functional programming
in functional programming, it
tends to be easier to do this.
And so, yeah.
Yeah.
People try to use domain driven
design in object oriented languages.
It is possible, but they also have
a crap ton of resources for it.
And there's a lot more examples
of things going on out there.
And so.
We could show improve to the outside
world and those other mainstream
languages, that high school is the best.
Is it one of the best languages to
be able to use domain driven design?
Um, I keep wanting to say
development, but I know it's not.
So I somehow keep correcting myself, but
you know, those are, you know, because
there's no real book out there right now.
Not everybody.
You know, Nasser's blog
posts, and we've talked about
those a lot, but it'd be nice
to have the full picture.
And I feel like a book on it would help.
>> Yeah, I would really
like to read a book like this.
I have a passing familiarity
with domain-driven design.
I'm kind of aware of the concept,
but I don't think I could explain
it that well, um, that being said, I
feel like Haskell is an exceptionally
good language for modeling domains.
So if that's what domain-driven design is
about, then I think Haskell excels at it
and having a book that kind of lays out.
Why that's the case and how to use
Haskell's features to effectively
model domains would be amazing.
Um, but to kind of bolster my own point
here, one of the reasons why I think
Haskell is so good at modeling domains
is that the combination of product and
some types along with pattern matching,
which other languages have these days
swift and rest are, are getting that
or have that, um, Those relatively
simple tools, make it so easy to exclude
impossible states from your program or
push them all the way to the boundary.
So like when you talk to the
database, something could go wrong
and you'll handle the error there.
But then once it gets into the
system, you know that you have a
bonafide user or, you know, episode
or whatever your domain object is.
You actually have one of those
things on hand and you don't have
to worry about it becoming invalid.
>> Right.
Yeah.
It's provides a lot of safety.
>> Yeah.
And that means peace of mind for people
like me, who, uh, came from, you know,
I used to program in Ruby doing a lot of
object oriented stuff and you Taishan,
and it was always, uh, a challenge
to know, okay, I have one of these
things on hand that says it's a user,
but it doesn't have this field set.
And this, you know, other fields
is supposed to mean this thing,
but it means this other thing.
And it's like, okay, well, What
am I supposed to do with this?
I don't know.
>> Yup.
Yup.
That's the world of JavaScript as well.
Yeah.
It makes me cry every night.
When I
think about the past.
Sorry, I'm coming back.
Let me come back.
Oh, okay.
>> it.
Yeah.
Uh, so should we move on to
the next, uh, hypothetical
book topic?
>> Yeah.
I think, I think this
will be the last one.
We'll probably cover and we're
getting there on time, but, uh,
what's the next one there to
>> So the next one is one that I'm
excited about, which is event sourcing
CQRS and reliable systems in Haskell.
And for those that don't know, C, Q, R S
stands for a command query responsibility,
segregation, and effectively, what that
means is you segregate or separate.
Your commands, things that change
your system and your queries, things
that ask the system for information.
Um, and this is, uh, well and backing
up even further in the title two event
sourcing, what does that, uh, event
sourcing is like instead of having
a database that you update in place,
you have a stream of events and as
new events come in your view of the
current state of your database changes.
But your actual source of
truth is that stream of events.
So a good example of this I think
is like instead of a user changing
their name and you say, okay, update
table users, set name, equal new
name, where ID equals one, two, three.
Um, that's kind of the traditional
way of doing it with event sourcing.
Uh, you would say we have a new event
that came in that says user one, two,
three, changed their name to new name.
And that's it.
And it's up to you to kind of, uh,
collapse all of your events down into
one thing that you can look at and
deal with like a normal database.
So this is kind of an advanced topic,
but I think it would be a really
fun one to explore and Haskell.
>> Yeah.
I think it would mean just
from your explanation.
It's something that I haven't
really heard of or dealt with.
So I think.
Having a book, maybe I'll, um, I may
look into some blog post after this
conversation, but, um, you know, trying
to have a book that explains this and
helps relate it to, you know, really how
to implement this in Haskell and how that
would work, uh, seemed super interesting.
Um, I know we have some, I know
they have like ones for some
Azure stuff and stuff like that.
So they have something along
those lines, but it's not,
you know, Exactly what we'd like, like it
to be, um, especially for Haskell, which.
>> to give a couple
more kind of footholds into
this area to explore for you.
And for other listeners that may be
interested event sourcing is also
often called Kappa architecture.
I think.
Um, and that's kind of where the stream
of events is your source of truth.
Um, and in Haskell, there is a library
called acid state that actually implements
things like this behind the scenes
where you can kind of interact with it
like a normal database, if you want to.
But the way that it works is by storing.
Events.
And then checkpointing every so
often so that it doesn't have to
roll up all the events every time.
And it's kind of a crazy
way to think about things.
Um, but it's actually used in
production hacking the official
package repository for Haskell actually
uses acid state as its primary.
>> you're going to say, ask
this date was a song by disturbed,
you know, cause I've got down with
the sickness and the other guy.
State.
So,
>> Yeah,
it could be.
>> I don't know.
Anyways, that's cool.
I'll have to check out acid state
and stay away from actual acid
>> Yeah.
Don't take that as an endorsement.
Um, I'm not a huge fan of acid state,
but it is a mind-bending concept.
So check it out for that reason.
>> so if you want to have
your mind bend, go to ass state.
Hmm.
Now I see why it's named that.
>> Exactly.
>> right.
There.
It is.
Awesome.
Well, uh, yeah, I think that does it, I
mean, this is a great post by Alexander.
Go check it out.
There's going to be a
link in the show notes.
So check that out.
Uh, and you know, if you find any interest
in any of these or have experience with
these, you'll start writing a book.
Well, thank you.
Just go on.
Leanpub charge 50 bucks for it.
You
know, you'll make 40 bucks a pop.
It'll be good.
>> Yeah, I was going to
say, it seems like Haskell books
have a pretty good track record
on Leanpub.
So we've talked on this show with Marco,
Sam Pellegrini, author of the simple Ascal
handbook, which was recently number one
on Leanpub and also, uh, Matt Parsons.
Uh, and his book I think
was at number one as well.
So it seems like a good way
to distribute Haskell books.
>> go Haskell, go lean pub.
I think the Haskell foundation
may partner with lean
pub to help create more content.
>> Yeah, that sounds
like a good idea to me.
>> Yeah.
>> All right.
Gamble.
You got anything else?
>> Uh, I think
That's about it for me.
>> That's all I got to.
Well, listeners, thank you so much for
listening to the Haskell weekly podcast.
I've been your host Taylor Fausak.
And with me today, as
usual was Cameron Gera.
If you'd like to find out more
about us, you can visit our website,
which is HaskellWeekly.News.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, I know you say as usual, but I
feel like it's been like every other
time nowadays, cause you've been doing
all these cool interviews, but anyways,
Haskell weekly is brought to you by it
pro TV, the e-learning platform for it
professionals and also our employer.
They would love to extend an offer
of 30% off the lifetime of your
subscription using the promo code Haskell
weekly 30 at checkout, all one word.
I'm pretty sure.
All lowercase, if not,
>> do.
>> did we ever fix that bug anyways?